Hopefully, most of you guys are familiar with the conjecture that Bot Lane wins games in Dominion. This is a guide on how bottom lane works, what you should do as a botlaner and what you should do as a top laner to clinch that win. I originally starting penning this guide in January of 2013 and it has taken me nearly 8 months to get back to finishing it as I got caught up in trying to build a team. To be honest, my knowledge of the game itself has grown as well as my own ability to diagnose mistakes and weaknesses as well as strengths in other players. That being said, the mechanics of botlane remain the same and I still feel like there is a huge knowledge gap out there on how to fit into the botlaner role for many people. The people that already are skilled at it already know much of this intrinsically and the ones that aren't skilled in it are often quite afraid to try the role out it seems. That being said, whether you are a toplaner or a botlaner, knowing how botlane works will vastly improve your game, not only for the times when you are forced into the botlane role, but also for the times when you need to deal with botlane - ganks, recovering botlane when the enemy forces it from you, and knowing when to pressure botlane instead of windmill)

Most highly experienced players understand this stuff as the tactics have been around for quite a while. I don't expect this to really help those players. The intended audience for this are those up-and-coming players or those mid-elo players who haven't quite figured out why they aren't winning enough games to break into high elo. This should also be useful for new Dominate Dominion tournament players. In fact, the lack of guides that specifically provided a little meat for the somewhat experienced player was what inspired me to write this. For most people, Sauron, Nekrogen, Fancy, and Koravel served well to get you started when you first started playing Dominion. Painkillar has a great compendium of guides that he keeps up and MMKH is still time-honored for his mantra of ganking bot incessently. The LolPro guides are a great addition to the Dominion Communitiy's knowledge base, but the tactical side of the game is somewhat lackluster. Sauron's guide promotes a lot of good tactics and pointers that are a great starting point. I want to go beyond that.

DISCLAIMER: This post only really applies to Mid to High Elo Dominion. Low Elo...does its own thing. This post will be opinionated. This is intended to provide some insight so your game gets better, aid up-and-comings who want to improve their game by learning tactics, and help toplaners understand the role of botlane and how it fits into their own gameplay. If you don't agree with me, post it in the comments below. If you're not a complete a-hole, we can talk about why I think what I think. I'll never stop learning and I'm open to learning more and discussing theory, but some of what I have learned is from sheer experience. So bring some numbers, reason, and willingness to try new things out with you or go troll somewhere else.

INTRODUCTION: The current Dominion meta is to run 4 members of the 5 man team toplane while having a single laner babysit the botlane point. While you're babysitting, you might as well kill creeps for farm since you have no other reliable method to get gold down here and the other laner is going to be taking that gold for himself. You also want to prevent those creeps from neutralizing your tower, so you're going to have to learn some creep control as well. Mix that in with some learning to defend from ganks and learning when to push and force their point and you have a LOT of stuff to learn and very little time and room for mistakes. Your first few botlane games will very likely not go well for you if you don't already have some skills to draw upon from Summoner's Rift. I'll begin the guide with a segment for botlaners and I'll place the toplaners section at the end.

REVIVE:
"Revive is the Flash of Dominion." - Sauron
As a botlaner, here's why it is so important to you:
- It allows you a chance to save your turret after a lost fight or gank.
- It allows you to suicidally pressure your opponent's turret and still save your botlane when the inevitable retribution comes (this is one of those "Don't do this at home, kids" things)
- Until your revive is on cooldown, the enemy team has to consider that botlane always has a single extra reinforcement (hang onto your revive as much as possible!!!)

Here's a few mistakes that I see a LOT:
- DO NOT use your revive to run back to the turret when the other team is capping with a massive minion wave - you won't make it back in time. The caveat to this is that if they are low and you can kill them underneath a turret, you might be able to justify this.
- DO NOT use this to rush back into a 2v1 or worse...you'll just die again and you won't have revive later when you need it.
- DO NOT use this when your opponent can outduel you anyway (once again, wasting a revive is...well...a waste)
- DO NOT use this just because your opponent killed you early and you want a revenge kill (they will likely just run and escape anyway)

TACTICS:
Make the other team react. This is a paraphrase of one of the central tenets to Sun Tzu's [I]The Art of War[/I]. We could have an entire guidebook written on how to apply his book's teachings to League in general, but suffice it to say that one of the major themes of his book is that you want to control your enemy - don't be reacting to them. Make sure YOU are the one setting the pace and make sure THEY are reacting to YOU. Maintaining the advantage of control means that you "control your own destiny" as it were - you can't rely on your opponents making mistakes to win games. Play as if they never make mistakes, but capitalize on every single mistake they make and punish them for it. That should always be your mantra.

BOTLANE:
As a botlaner, your role on the team is to provide some sort of control over the bottom lane for your team and to force the other team to react to you in some way. Getting members of the other team to gank you is one way (as long as they aren't just taking your turret in the process). Taking their turret and forcing them to try and take it back is another. As you are a member of a team, the responsibility for the bottom turret belongs to the whole team, but you need to provide a constant pressure botlane to the other team's turret. Consider yourself a constant split-pusher with your laning partner acting in the same role.

There are a number of ways which you can apply pressure and control the flow of botlane:

- Kill the other laner and take his turret! (This, of course, is everyone's favorite method as tends to demoralize the other team and make them rage when you kill their teammate for the 5th time in a row)
- Push a giant creepwave into the other turret and neutralize it.
- Farm up and wait either for lategame or for ganks to do anything
- Stalemate a lane
- Live as long as possible (Most people probably play blind and, well, you get counterpicked accidently sometimes. Sometimes, the only thing you can do is try and live as long as you possibly can until your team can gank. A swap is usually better, but heck, it's yolo queue)
- Roam as the botlaner
- Swap top (if you can't apply any sort of pressure botlane and you can't stalemate a lane while your team is winning toplane, maybe a swap is in order...usually the person who swaps needs to be able to stalemate the lane because he will be behind in farm)
- Duo botlane (It works in certain cases. Having a good partner who can just babysit the lane can completely wreck the other team in many cases)

Kill the other guy strategy:
This one is fairly simple and doesn't need a whole lot of exposition. Basically, it completely depends on your matchup. If you can kill the other laner and force his revive (WITHOUT GIVING UP YOURS! Don't trade revives. The whole point of trying to take their revive is to try and GAIN the advantage), you gain an advantage. If you can kill him again, do it. Alternately, your team can now gank the other laner because he doesn't have revive. Now toplane MUST react or you take his turret. We'll discuss ganking later. This is one example of how you can force the other team to react to you.

Creep Pushing:
Entire guides have been made on creep control. I have a different focus for this guide, so teaching creep control is not appropriate here. If anyone has a good suggestion of a guide I could link here, give me suggestions below. I found some old ones, but I don't want to detract from this guide by linking material that contains some dated information.

For those of you who understand basic creep control mechanics, you'll want to learn Dominion's specific creep mechanics. Learn to stack waves and push them into the other team's tower at once. Obviously, some champions are better than others at this and your ability to shove waves into your opponent's tower is going to depend on their ability to wave clear as well. Harassing while pushing/clearing/farming is a skill that you NEED to know how to use. Knowing that you can use spells in creep waves without aggroing the creeps and knowing that auto attacks always aggro nearby creeps is pretty key. Using the Speed Shrine to creatively harass your opponent (for some matchups, the speed shrine will make or break your ability to fight at all) and using bushes as well to drop aggro/vision (though sometimes those bushes are buggy) is another skill you need to practice and learn.

Farming:
So maybe the other laner has better wave control than you or can outduel you at least early game. If you can't win engagements, don't fight them - if you can help it. Just farm up as best you can. You will have LOTS of bad matchups in yolo queue. Learn to farm for these situations. Once you reach some sort of critical mass point, you can consider engaging. A lot of this is just knowledge - knowing level spikes, item spike points, and, of course, the matchup itself - if you've never played a particular matchup before, you're going to have to experiment some.

Stalemating:
Ahh, the classic Maokai stalemate lanes. Stalemate lanes work. Sort of. In season 2, you could build full tank stalemate a botlane virtually indefinitely with some champions. You can still do this to a limited degree, but people have gotten smarter and penetration items are commonplace, so this is no longer as easy as it used to be. However, a laner with good sustain and waveclear that can avoid harass can indefinitely keep a point from being capped as long as their opponent can't harass them reliabily on turret and as long as no one from toplane intervenes. Even some bad matchups can be salvaged with good wavclear and sustain and some regular ganks from toplane.

If you are having a tough time in botlane and you can't farm, consider falling back to this strategy. If your toplane can win, then it's better that you just don't lose botlane than risk giving up botlane and possibly losing top's momentum for them. Maokai has always been really great at this. Galio can do this...with enough items, most bruisers and ADCs can stall...Almost any pusher laner can be turned into a stall laner with some self control (Malz players...looking at you...). Instead of using your pushing power to push the lane...move the lane slightly closer to your point and use your abilities to waveclear. This varies by matchup, but if you have good push, you usually also have decent to good waveclear. Be aware that being pushed up onto your tower makes ganks a LOT easier most of the time...combine burst with CC and the other team can easily kill you on turret as you have fewer directions to use for juking. Being pushed up onto your tower also means that the other team's creepline is right there ready to neutralize your turret and, at the very least, is probably damaging your turret as you desparately try to kill the creeps.

Live as long as you can:
This is a really sucky strategy, but sometimes you are in a situation where you can't do anything...you can't stalemate because the other laner can harass you with impunity and you can't sustain through it (Yorick is one of the worst for this and the reason why he is hated. If you have a bad matchup, even a bad Yorick WILL back you up to your turret and he WILL harass you ON your turret while you are desparately trying to waveclear. This is terrible for a single laner, but a boon for a team that has any sense. This places Yorick in a bit of danger if your team is smart about ganking - we'll talk about that shortly). When this happens, just try and stay alive as long as you can. Take as little harass as possible, warn your teammates, try to stay calm, and just accept that your KDA is going to look terrible. Buy defensive items and try and weather the beating as best as you can. DO NOT waste revive unless you can get the turret back (if you're being harassed on the turret, it's doubtful that revive will help. It will just be you running up to the turret to die another suicidal death, helping your lanemate get even further ahead in gold/levels). Save it for when it will HELP you.

Roaming Botlaner:
This is a tough lane to pull off, but it can be quite rewarding. This is usually seen with global/near global ult champs (TF, Panth, Nocturne, Shen...Karthus and GP act somewhat similarly). The concept is that the laner provides global presence somehow while remaining in lane and farming when their ult is down. Another possible roaming case is using a fast champion like Janna and Zilean who can interrupt and clear waves quickly as well as move quickly to quickly push a lane, hit the speed shrine and run up for a quick teamfight. Their ability to contribute even minimally to a teamfight while still providing great control over their lane means that the other team has to deal with just a little bit more pressure from botlane.

Both of these roaming strategies rely on the other laner being unable to push the lane into your tower to cap it while you are away either because they can't push fast enough or because you have consistently punished their attempts by ganking/otherwise killing them when they have done so. One way your team can help out is to try and engage teamfights in the southern section of the map. We've recently seen Nocturne, for example, have great success in being able to join a teamfight toplane, burst down enemies and grant their side a 5 to 1 advantage in people alive...you can then just come botlane and kill the other laner if they push out or at the very least pressure that turret and hopefully the enemy's mid as well...splitting the enemy team in the process and potentially even gaining a 5 cap.

Swap:
If the lane matchup is bad and one of your toplaner's can waveclear and stalemate against your lanemate, swap lanes! Do it early before the item advantage/level advantage from them farming and killing you over and over becomes too great.

Duo Botlane:
Knowing when to duo botlane is probably the biggest problem with this strategy. Don't duo botlane if you are currently winning in all lanes. Botlane isn't a club that you can just hang out in because you have nothing better to do. Get back into the jungle and kill all the things! Most of the time, people who have a good idea of when to duo botlane don't need this guide, but a basic guide for when to duo and when to not duo is this - if your team's 1v1 bottom is an unfavorable matchup but your team's 2v2 bottom lane is a favorable one (this also means that toplane isn't going to be a complete loss at the same time), then you should duo botlane.

TOPLANE:
It's really critical that we address toplaners in this guide as well. As part of the team, they share responsibility for the control of botlane. Just as in Summoner's Rift, a little bit of influence from outside the lane can go a LONG way. You want to always make sure that your team pays more attention to botlane than the other team or that your botlaner can handle that undue attention. I'm going to explain how you as a toplaner need to interact with botlane. We'll discuss jungle control, ganking, and overall applying pressure top.

Jungle Control:
If you aren't controlling the jungle already, one of a few things is probably going on:
- You don't know how important it is
- You don't know how to do it
- You don't know about Sweeper/Grez
- The other team is doing a better job of it
- You've been told umpteen times how important it is, but you're stubborn

If you don't know how important it is, let me explain it this way - if you camp a point with your whole team, the other team just assaults a different point (If you're all sitting on windmill, they go to your mid as a team) and FORCES you to fight them in the jungle on the way to defend that point. If you split your team to defend multiple points, the other team moves as a team and cuts off, surrounds, and bursts down the split members. Now they are ready to fight you with a numbers advantage. In both cases, you are giving up the advantages you have and allowing the other team to control the game - and now you have to react to them (in the first instance, despite holding 3 points, the other team was able to force you to give up your turret advantage. In the second, splitting up to defend multiple points allows the other team to quickly burst down a portion of your team and reengage the rest of your team with the advantage of an extra person).

If, instead, you were to group up and head into the jungle together, using sweeper and Grez's lantern to get sight on bushes, you now start on equal footing and you can retreat to turrets if you don't like fighting in the jungle. Worst case is that you have to fight on equal terms with the other team. The worst case scenarios which I described above in our previous examples of teams sitting on points are much worse. The BEST case scenario from those first situations is the same as the worst case of trying to control the jungle - parity. So if the worst case of trying to control the jungle is equal to the best case scenario of sitting on a point and jungle control offers potential advantages based upon how you teamfight, then why WOULDN'T you do it?

But wait, shouldn't you be using the turrets to you advantage? Absolutely. But the ONLY time you have an advantage with turrets is when the other team is pushing minions down the lane to a turret AND your teammates are nearby or you know EXACTLY where the other team's members are (on the other side of the map...if you know they are nearby, it's no longer then an advantage). If they are pushing that lane, get on the turret and wave clear. That's what you SHOULD do. But get off that turret as soon as the other team runs into the jungle.

Sweeper/Grez's Spectral Lantern: OP Items. Buy them. If you don't have one or the other on YOUR champion, get one. Both items have some of the HIGHEST cost efficiency in the game and provide absolutely ridiculously insane stats.

Now, back to why jungle control is important to botlane. If your team can't go into the jungle without dying, you are not going to be able to get anywhere toplane, and your bottom lane is going to suffer because ganks can come from all directions and will likely come often. Even if no ganks come, the botlaner needs to remain conscious of this fact and is limited in what he can do because of the threat of ganks. Thus, it's critical that you not completely lose control of the jungle toplane because it affects botlane very harshly as well.

Ganking:
It's very popular to quote the MMKH flowchart - "If you are winning top, gank bot, and if you are losing top, gank bot."

The question I want to address is, "Why?". When you're winning toplane, why even concentrate on bottom lane, especially if they are already winning? And, most importantly, why is this decision important for botlaners?

Toplane is very swingy. When teams are evenly matched, Windmill has a tendency to change hands quite often. It takes a large advantage to consistently hold onto Windmill for an extended period of time. Eventually, that advantage tends to wane as parity increases throughout the game (there are rubber-banding mechanics and as the game goes on, gold/level gaps tend to become insignificant). Thus, it is important to take advantage of the advantage that you have when you have it - before it is no longer an advantage (this is another tenet of Sun Tzu's Art of War). So, how do you decide between pushing for their mid and pushing for botlane? Well, let's look at it this way, which advantage is bigger? 4v4 with one side having more gold, or 2v1? Now compare the 2v1 advantage to the 3v4 disadvantage? A 2v1 advantage creates a much bigger gap, one that can be more easily turned into results than a 3v4. Granted, you don't want a 3v4 for an extended period of time, but if you are the one making things happen, then your disadvantage should never be readily apparent to the enemy. Use Fog of War and your own team's jungle control to prevent the enemy from knowing what's coming until it's too late. Your 3v4 can always retreat to a point and defend from there.

This is actually the biggest complaint I see about ganking. Some toplaner's don't seem to realize that they don't HAVE to fight toplane while a gank is happening. You can properly prepare for a gank by quickly pushing out a minion wave if it's close to your turret or just having some control over the jungle. The enemy should NEVER engage on you 4v3 unless you get caught out of position. You should always be in the jungle so that they don't know your position (this is absolutely CRITICAL - if 3 of you sit on a turret toplane and the enemy moves toward your mid turret, now you have to 1. find them in the jungle on the way to mid, and 2. hope you get a good engage 3v4 on them...the odds are NOT in your favor). To give you the best chance for success, your ganker should NEVER be seen until he comes out of the fog of war for the gank. At this point, the enemy has to react. Can they take top or mid turret from 3 people before you take their bottom turret 2v1? Best case scenario is that the enemy sends 1 person botlane to respond and your team kills the botlaner before they arrive making it another 2v1 while toplane has an equal 3v3. You are likely to force their turret botlane.

Now, let's be completely straight here, ganking does not guarantee an advantage. If the other team can react before your gank kills the other team's botlaner AND manage to keep top as well, your potential advantage is neutralized. Finding a good opportunity to gank is the first and most important aspect for this to work. Experience is, frankly, the most important aspect of knowing when a gank will be successful or a grand waste of time. Someone should really make a ganking guide to address some of the problems I've seen before: "ganks" when a botlaner is dead already, people walking down the visible portion of the outside ring of the map (I guess they're "hoping" no one sees them), not using the fog of war effectively, and multitudes of other mistakes.

Making your ganks effective and as efficient as possible is also very important. If your goal is to burn a revive or get a kill, do so fast. If your goal is take the point, make sure you actually can, and reevaluate if/when they pop revive or if someone decides to reinforce botlane. Back off when if the enemy team brings superior forces to reinforce. You may want to back off if the enemy team can manage to bring equivalent numbers to bear as they will have turret advantage as well.

So how do botlaners prepare for and deal with ganks? You can try and let the minions move towards your point and bait the other laner into a position between midlane and your turret where pincering is easier, however, while this makes securing a kill much easier, it actually has some strong downsides - 1, this places you farther from their turret which means that it will take you longer to turn your kill into a point cap and 2, allowing the other laner push means that you may have to take time to defend your point and/or get your own minion wave pushing which means that you aren't going to have minion help for the cap (or you're gonna have to delay the cap). Either way, ganking on your side of the map is GREAT if you are trying to take a revive from the opposite team's botlaner or take pressure off of your own turret. However, if you are trying to go on the offensive and take your opponents' turret, ganking on the other team's side of the map gets you closer to their turret and grants you the advantage of the minion push. In fact, an extremely effective technique for the botlaner is to push a double wave of minions at the turret right as a gank comes in from the fog of war.

As a botlaner, you want to have minions pushing in your advantage whenever a gank comes for a couple different reasons - having more minions means the other botlaner will take more damage if fighting in minions and having more minions means that the lane will push on its own DURING the gank. Just like Summoner's Rift, harassing the other laner is also a great precursor to a gank. One of the most important things, however, when dealing with ganks, is participation...the ganker needs to communicate that he's ganking. But, the botlaner needs to time his waveclearing as much as he possibly can with the gank. However, if the timing is off, make sure you prioritize bringing the other champion down if at all possible. I've seen many a gank fail because the botlaner spent too long killing minions while the other laner got away (I'm guilty of it myself). At the same time, I've seen gankers come at an inopportune time where a minion wave is large enough to neutralize your own turret and you NEED to clear minions first.

I'm being somewhat repetitive here because it's really important that botlaners and toplaners alike both understand creep control at least somewhat. I can't even tell you how many times I have been ganked and killed, then a toplaner reinforces the
lane for a few seconds before leaving a gigantic creep wave to neutralize my turret...Then, as I come back to re-cap the turret, the other team harasses me for quite a while while I try to get it back. If you're botlane, pay close attention to the creep wave. Quickly clear that wave before leaving lane. At the same time, you don't need to push unless requested (maybe your botlaner is just stalemating the lane) or unless you are explicitly pushing the bottom turret. Wasting 20s to kill 3 minions because you don't have a fast waveclear is just that - a waste, especially if I'm already on my way.

Toplane Pressure:
So, now that you understand how easy it is to tip the balance of botlane in one direction or the other, we're going to discuss the last weapon you have in your arsenal to deal with botlane from toplane - pressure. If your botlane is being pressured hard and you have either lost it already or are under threat of it being lost, you have to make a choice - do we counter the pressure botlane by defending botlane or by applying more pressure toplane. A lot of this is going to be dependent on the state of the game - is the botlane pressure coming from a stronger botlaner or from their toplane applying pressure to your botlane? If the other team's botlaner is crushing your botlaner without help from their toplane, then you probably should consider ganking botlane. If the other team is crushing your botlaner WITH ganks, then you either need to countergank or you need to let your botlane go and apply heavy pressure to their midpoint with your 4v3. Knowing which one to do is going to be a function of knowing your team and composition and how it stacks up with the other team's. Often, it's MUCH easier and effective to just gank bottom lane. This is why MMKH's flowchart is so popular - it works about 90% of the time. Smart teams will, however, countergank you and try to engage on your team's 3v4 to disrupt your pressure.

No matter how you choose to apply pressure, it is important that you understand that you MUST apply SOME sort of pressure at all times - even when you hold more points than the other team. Anytime that you are not applying pressure, the other team can take advantage of such and snowball their own bottom lane or take some other objective. If the other team realizes that you are weak toplane and are not applying pressure at all (maybe you are all pushing the creep waves into windmill...the other team knows where you are and can ignore you if they so choose), then you are leaving your own botlane open to receive ganks. If YOU are the one applying the pressure, whether it be toplane or bottom lane or just applying pressure everywhere by controlling the jungle, then the OTHER team has to react to you, and, once again, you hold significant advantage.

Closing Arguments:
Botlane in Dominion is a very critical role. Without a strong botlaner, teams struggle to maintain any sort of control over the game. Knowing Champion matchups is incredibly important, but knowing the mechanics of botlane and understanding how botlane interacts with the rest of the team is far more critical to teamplay. It's important for toplaners to know basic mechanics of botlane in order to understand when it's appropriate for them to come bottom lane and when it's a waste of their time. This isn't an easy thing and there's always some room for opinion on this, however, understanding the mechanics around why people do what they do helps you to make those hard decisions on your own and will, hopefully, make you a better player.